---
authors: Grzegorz Uriasz (gorbak25@gmail.com)
state: living-document
---

# RFD 0 - Request For Discussion

## What

Request For Discussion (RFD) is a design document format for non-trivial
technical changes. It's also a process by which these documents are proposed, discussed, approved and tracked.

## Why

To invite anyone to propose new Hocus features, comment on existing design decisions and see what's upcoming. RFDs apply to major high level decisions, features, directions, and never to bugfixes, small changes, and refactors.

Hocus is still in **alpha** stage, so we keep RFDs flexible and simple to avoid slowing down our two-person team and to encourage external input and proposals from the community. Some RFDs may be very brief at this point.

External contributors who want to make significant changes or add new features must always open or update an RFD before their contribution can be accepted.

RFDs formalize the process of discussing technical changes and provide several benefits:

- discussions are retained in GitHub pull requests and commit history
- discussions are in the open, for users to see and contribute
- discussions are stored in one central place
- approvals are recorded and enforced

This template takes heavy inspiration from https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0000-rfds.md which was inspired by https://oxide.computer/blog/rfd-1-requests-for-discussion/ which was made on the basis of https://www.ietf.org/standards/rfcs/

## Details

Each RFD is stored in a markdown file under
https://github.com/hocus-dev/hocus/tree/main/rfd and has a unique
number.

### structure

Each RFD consists of:

1. a header containing author name(s) and [state](#states)
1. title in the format `RFD $NUMBER - $TITLE`
1. the `What` section - 1-3 sentence summary of what this RFD is about
1. the `Why` section - 1-3 sentences(or paragraphs) describing motivation for the RFD
1. the `Details` section - short description of the proposal, including
   APIs, UI design, migrations or any other relevant information. At the current project stage the details section might not cover every detail. Details might get amended.

**Use this RFD as an example/template for your own RFDs.**

### process

Here's the process from an RFD idea in your head to a working implementation in the main Hocus branch.

1. pick an RFD number

   check [submitted](https://github.com/hocus-dev/rfd/tree/main/rfd)
   and
   [pending](https://github.com/hocus-dev/hocus/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen+label%3Arfd)
   RFDs and pick the next available number.

   For example, you're writing an RFD titled 'Hocus Nix Integration' and end up with number 1337.

1. make a branch off of `main` called `rfd/$number-your-title`

   In our example, it'll be branch `rfd/1337-hocus-nix-integration`.

1. write your RFD under `/rfd/$number-your-title.md`

   Our example RFD is in `/rfd/1337-hocus-nix-integration.md`.

1. submit a PR titled `RFD $number: Your Title` and tag it with the `rfd` label

   Our example RFD title: `RFD 1337: Hocus Nix Integration`

1. iterated on the RFD based on reviewer feedback and get approvals

   Note: it's OK to use meetings or chat to discuss the RFD, but please write
   down the outcome in PR comments. A future reader will be grateful!

1. merge the PR and start implementing

1. once implemented, make another PR changing the `state` to `implemented` and
   updating any details that changed during implementation

If an RFD is eventually deprecated (e.g. a feature is removed), make a PR
changing the `state` to `deprecated` and optionally link to the replacement RFD
(if applicable).

#### states

1. `living-document` - RFD describes a non technical process or direction which is prone to significant changes over time
1. `draft` - RFD is proposed or approved, but not yet implemented
1. `implemented` - RFD is approved and implemented
1. `deprecated` - RFD was approved and/or implemented at one point, but is now deprecated and should only be referenced for historic
   context; a superseding RFD, if one exists, may be linked in the header

The purpose of the `state` is to tell the reader whether they should care about
this RFD at all. For example, `deprecated` RFDs can be skipped most of the
time. `implemented` is relevant to Hocus users, but `draft` is mostly for Hocus team members and contributors.
